access plan	A set of instructions, generated at applicationcompilation time, that is created and managed by a DBMS.The access plan predetermines the way an application’squery will access the database at run time
active data dictionary	A data dictionary that isautomatically updated by the database management systemevery time the database is accessed, thereby keeping itsinformation current. See also data dictionary
ActiveX	Microsoft’s alternative to Java. A specification forwriting programs that will run inside the Microsoft clientbrowser (Internet Explorer). Oriented mainly to Windowsapplications, it is not portable. It adds “controls” such asdrop-down windows and calendars to Web pages
ActiveX Data Objects (ADO)	A Microsoft objectframework that provides a high-level application-orientedinterface to interact with OLE-DB, DAO, and RDO. ADOprovides a unified interface to access data from anyprogramming language that uses the underlying OLE-DBobjects
ad hoc query	A “spur-of-the-moment” question
ADO.NET	The data access component of Microsoft’s .NETapplication development framework. The Microsoft .NETframework is a component-based platform for developingdistributed, heterogeneous, and interoperable applicationsaimed at manipulating any type of data over any networkunder any operating system and programming language
alias	An alternative name given to a column or table in anySQL statement
ALTER	The SQL command used to make changes to tablestructure. Followed by a keyword (ADD or MODIFY), it addsa column or changes column characteristics
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)	The groupthat accepted the DBTG recommendations and augmenteddatabase standards in 1975 through its SPARC committee
AND	The SQL logical operator used to link multipleconditional expressions in a WHERE or HAVING clause. Itrequires that all conditional expressions evaluate to true
anonymous PL/SQL block	A PL/SQL block that has notbeen given a specific name
application processor	See transaction processor (TP)
application programming interface (API)	Softwarethrough which programmers interact with middleware.Allows the use of generic SQL code, thereby allowing clientprocesses to be database server-independent
atomic attribute	An attribute that cannot be furthersubdivided to produce meaningful components. Forexample, a person’s last name attribute cannot bemeaningfully subdivided into other name components;therefore, the last name attribute is atomic
atomicity	See atomic transaction property
atomic transaction property	A property of transactionsthat states that all parts of a transaction must be treated as asingle logical unit of work in which all operations must becompleted (committed) to produce a consistent database
attribute	A characteristic of an entity or object. An attributehas a name and a data type
attribute domain	See domain
attribute hierarchy	Provides a top-down data organizationthat is used for two main purposes: aggregation anddrill-down/roll-up data analysis
audit log	A database management system security featurethat automatically records a brief description of the databaseoperations performed by all users
authentication	The process through which a DBMS verifiesthat only registered users are able to access the database
authorization management	All activities that are dedicatedto enforcing the security, privacy, and integrity of the data ina database
automatic query optimization	A method by which aDBMS takes care of finding the most efficient access pathfor the execution of a query
AVG	A SQL aggregate function that outputs the meanaverage for the specified column or expression
back-end CASE tools	A computer-aided software tool thathas been classified as “back end” because it providessupport for the coding and implementation phases of theSDLC. In comparison, front-end case tools provide supportfor the planning, analysis, and design phases
base table	The table on which a view is based
batch update routine	A routine that pools transactions intoa single “batch” to update a master table in a singleoperation
binary lock	A lock that has only two states: locked(1) andunlocked(0). If a data item is locked by a transaction, noother transaction can use that data item. See also lock
binary relationship	An ER term used to describe anassociation (relationship) between two entities. Example:PROFESSOR teaches COURSE
Boolean algebra	A branch of mathematics that deals withthe use of the logical operators OR, AND, and NOT
bottom-up design	A design philosophy that begins byidentifying individual design components and thenaggregates those components into larger units. In databasedesign, it is a process that begins by defining attributesandthen groups those attributes into entities. Compare totop-down design.63
boundaries	The external limits to which any proposedsystem is subjected. These include budget, personnel, andexisting hardware and software
Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF)	A special form of thirdnormal form (3NF) in which every determinant is acandidate key. A table that is in BCNF must be in 3NF. Seealso determinant
bridge entity	See composite entity
buffer	See buffer cache
buffer cache	A shared, reserved memory area that storesthe most recently accessed data blocks in RAM. Also calleddata cache. Used to take advantage of a computer’s fastprimary memory compared to the slower secondarymemory, thereby minimizing the number of input/output(I/O) operations between the primary and secondarymemories
business rule	Narrative descriptions of a policy, procedure,or principle within an organization. Examples: A pilotcannot be on duty for more than 10 hours during a 24-hourperiod. A professor may teach up to four classes during anyone semester
bus topology	Network topology requiring that all computersbe connected to a main network cable. Usually implementedusing coaxial cable; it bears the disadvantage that a singlelost computer can result in network segment breakdown
Call Level Interface (CLI)	A standard developed by theSQL Access Group for database access
candidate key	See key
cardinality	Assigns a specific value to connectivity.Expresses the range (minimum to maximum) of allowedentity occurrences associated with a single occurrence of therelated entity
cascading order sequence	Refers to a nested orderingsequence for a set of rows. For example, a list in which alllast names are alphabetically ordered and, within the lastnames, all first names are ordered represents a cascadingsequence
CASE	See computer-assisted software engineering(CASE)
centralized database	A database located at a single site
centralized design	A process in which a single conceptualdesign is modeled to match an organization’s databaserequirements. Typically used when a data componentconsists of a relatively small number of objects andprocedures. Compare to decentralized design
checkpoint	In transaction management, an operation inwhich the database management system writes all of itsupdated buffers to disk.63
Chen model	See entity relationship (ER) model
class	A collection of like objects with shared structure(attributes) and behavior (methods). A class encapsulates anobject’s data representation and a method’s implementation.Classes are organized in a class hierarchy
class hierarchy	The organization of classes in a hierarchicaltree where each “parent” class is a superclassand each“child” class is a subclass. See also inheritance
client/server architecture	Refers to the arrangement ofhardware and software components to form a systemcomposed of clients, servers, and middleware. Theclient/server architecture features a user of resources, or aclient, and a provider of resources, or a server
client-side extensions	These extensions add functionality toa Web browser. Although available in various forms, themost commonly encountered extensions are plug-ins, Java,JavaScript, ActiveX, and VBScript
closure	A property of relational operators that permits theuse of relational algebra operators on existing tables(relations) to produce new relations
cohesivity	The strength of the relationships between amodule’s components. Module cohesivity must be high
COMMIT	The SQL command that permanently saves datachanges to a database
Common Gateway Interface (CGI)	A Web server interfacestandard that uses script files to perform specific functionsbased on a client’s parameters
completeness constraint	A constraint that specifieswhether each entity supertype occurrence must also be amember of at least one subtype. The completenessconstraint can be partial or total. Partial completenessmeans that not every supertype occurrence is a member ofa subtype; that is, there may be some supertype occurrencesthat are not members of any subtype. Total completenessmeans that every supertype occurrence must be a memberof at least one subtype
composite attribute	An attribute that can be furthersubdivided to yield additional attributes. For example, aphone number (615-898-2368) may be divided into an areacode (615), an exchange number (898), and a four-digitcode (2368). Compare to simple attribute
composite entity	An entity designed to transform an M:Nrelationship into two 1:M relationships. The compositeentity’s primary key comprises at least the primary keys ofthe entities that it connects. Also known as a bridge entity.See also linking table
composite key	A multiple-attribute key
computer-assisted software engineering (CASE)	Toolsused to automate part or all of the Systems DevelopmentLife Cycle
conceptual design	A process that uses data modelingtechniques to create a model of a database structure thatrepresents the real-world objects in the most realistic waypossible. Both software- and hardware-independent
conceptual model	The output of the conceptual designprocess. The conceptual model provides a global view of anentire database. Describes the main data objects, avoidingdetails
conceptual schema	A representation of the conceptualmodel, usually expressed graphically. See also conceptualmodel
concurrency control	A DBMS feature that is used tocoordinate the simultaneous execution of transactions in amultiprocessing database system while preserving dataintegrity
concurrent backup	A backup that takes place while one ormore users are working on a database
Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL)	Agroup originally formed to help standardize COBOL; itsDBTG subgroup helped to develop database standards inthe early 1970s
connectivity	Describes the classification of the relationshipbetween entities. Classifications include 1:1, 1:M, and M:N
consistency	A database condition in which all data integrityconstraints are satisfied. To ensure consistency of adatabase, every transaction must begin with the database ina known consistent state. If the database is not in aconsistent state, the transaction will yield an inconsistentdatabase that violates its integrity and business rules
consistent database state	A database state in which alldata integrity constraints are satisfied
constraint	A restriction placed on data. Constraints arenormally expressed in the form of rules. Example: “Astudent’s GPA must be between 0.00 and 4.00.” Constraintsare important because they help to ensure dataintegrity
coordinator	The transaction processor (TP) node thatcoordinates the execution of a two-phase COMMIT in aDDBMS. See also data processor (DP), transactionprocessor (TP), and two-phase commit protocol
correlated subquery	A subquery that executes once foreach row in the outer query
cost-based optimizer	A query optimizer technique that usesan algorithm based on statistics about the objects beingaccessed, that is, number of rows, indexes available, indexessparsity, and so on
COUNT	A SQL aggregate function that outputs the numberof rows containing not null values for a given column orexpression, sometimes used in conjunction with theDISTINCT clause
CREATE INDEX	A SQL command that creates indexes onthe basis of any selected attribute or attributes
CREATE TABLE	A SQL command used to create a table’sstructures, using the characteristics and attributes given
CREATE VIEW	A SQL command that creates a logical,“virtual” table that can be treated as a “real” table
cross join	A join that performs a relational product (alsoknown as the Cartesian product) of two tables
Crow’s Foot notation	A representation of the entityrelationship diagram using a three-pronged symbol torepresent the “many” sides of the relationship
cube cache	In multidimensional OLAP, refers to the shared,reserved memory area where data cubes are held. Using thecube cache assists in speeding up data access
cursor	A special construct used in procedural SQL to holdthe data rows returned by a SQL query. A cursor may bethought of as a reserved area of memory in which theoutput of the query is stored, like an array holding columnsand rows. Cursors are held in a reserved memory area inthe DBMS server, not in the client computer
data	Raw facts, that is, facts that have not yet beenprocessed to reveal their meaning to the end user
Data Access Objects (DAO)	An object-oriented API(application programming interface) used to access MSAccess, MS FoxPro, and dBase databases (using the Jet dataengine) from Visual Basic programs. DAO provides anoptimized interface that exposes the functionality of the Jetdata engine (on which MS Access database is based) toprogrammers. The DAO interface can also be used toaccess other relational style data sources
data administrator (DA)	The person responsible formanaging the entire data resource, whether computerized ornot. The DA has broader authority and responsibility thanthe database administrator (DBA). Also known as aninformation resource manager (IRM)
data allocation	In a distributed DBMS, describes theprocess of deciding where to locate data fragments
data anomaly	A data abnormality that exists wheninconsistent changes to a database have been made. Forexample, an employee moves, but the address change iscorrected in only one file and not across all files in thedatabase
database	A shared, integrated computer structure thathouses a collection of related data. A database contains twotypes of data: end-user data (raw facts) and metadata. Themetadata consist of data about data, that is, the datacharacteristics and relationships
database administrator (DBA)	The person responsible forplanning, organizing, controlling, and monitoring thecentralized and shared corporate database. The DBA is thegeneral manager of the database administration department.63
database design	The process that yields the description ofthe database structure. The database design processdetermines the database components. Database design isthe second phase of the database life cycle
database development	A term used to describe the processof database design and implementation
database fragments	Subsets of a distributed database.Although the fragments may be stored at different siteswithin a computer network, the set of all fragments istreated as a single database. See also horizontalfragmentationand vertical fragmentation
database instance	In an Oracle DBMS, refers to thecollection of processes and data structures used to manage aspecific database
database-level lock	A type of lock that restricts databaseaccess to only the owner of the lock. It allows only one userat a time to access the database. Successful for batchprocesses, but unsuitable for online multiuser DBMSs
database life cycle (DBLC)	The history of a databasewithin an information system. Divided into six phases: initialstudy, design, implementation and loading, testing andevaluation, operation and maintenance, and evolution
database management system (DBMS)	Refers to thecollection of programs that manages the database structureand controls access to the data stored in the database
database middleware	Database connectivity softwarethrough which application programs connect andcommunicate with data repositories
database object	Any object in a database, such as a table, aview, an index, a stored procedure, or a trigger
database performance tuning	A set of activities andprocedures designed to reduce the response time of adatabase system, that is, to ensure that an end-user query isprocessed by the DBMS in the minimum amount of time
database recovery	The process of restoring a database to aprevious consistent state
database request	The equivalent of a single SQL statementin an application program or a transaction
database security officer (DSO)	Responsible for thesecurity, integrity, backup, and recovery of the database
database system	An organization of components thatdefines and regulates the collection, storage, management,and use of data in a database environment
database task group (DBTG)	A CODASYL committeethat helped develop database standards in the early 1970s.See also Conference on Data Systems Languages(CODASYL)
data cache	A shared, reserved memory area that stores themost recently accessed data blocks in RAM. Also calledbuffer cache.64
data cube	Refers to the multidimensional data structureused to store and manipulate data in a multidimensionalDBMS. The location of each data value in the data cube isbased on the x-, y-, and z-axes of the cube. Data cubes arestatic (must be created before they are used), so they cannotbe created by an ad hoc query
data definition language (DDL)	The language that allows adatabase administrator to define the database structure,schema, and subschema
data dependence	A data condition in which the datarepresentation and manipulation are dependent on thephysical data storage characteristics
data dictionary	A DBMS component that store
metadata	data about data. Thus, the data dictionarycontains the data definition as well as its characteristics andrelationships. A data dictionary may also include data thatare external to the DBMS. Also known as an informationresource dictionary.See also active data dictionary,metadata,and passive data dictionary
Data Encryption Standard(DES)	The most widely usedstandard for private-key encryption. DES is used by the U.S.government
data extraction	A process used to extract and validate datataken from an operational database and external datasources prior to their placement in a data warehouse
datafile	See data files
data files	A named physical storage space that stores adatabase’s data. It can reside in a different directory on ahard disk or on one or more different hard disks. All data ina database are stored in data files. A typical enterprisedatabase is normally composed of several data files. A datafile can contain rows from one table, or it can contain rowsfrom many different tables
data filtering	See data extraction
data fragmentation	A characteristic of a DDBMS thatallows a single object to be broken into two or moresegments or fragments. The object might be a user’sdatabase, a system database, or a table. Each fragment canbe stored at any site over a computer network
data inconsistency	A condition in which different versionsof the same data yield different (inconsistent) results
data independence	A condition that exists when dataaccess is unaffected by changes in the physical data storagecharacteristics
data integrity	A condition in which given data always yieldthe same result. Data integrity is mandatory in any database.In a relational database, refers to the characteristic thatallows a DBMS to maintain entity and referential integrity
data management	A process that focuses on datacollection, storage, and retrieval. Common datamanagement functions include addition, deletion,modification, and listing
data manager (DM)	See data processing (DP) manager
data manipulation language (DML)	The language (set ofcommands) that allows an end user to manipulate the datain the database (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE,COMMIT, and ROLLBACK)
data mart	A small, single-subject data warehouse subset thatprovides decision support to a small group of people
data mining	A process that employs automated tools toanalyze data in a data warehouse and other sources and toproactively identify possible relationships and anomalies
data model	A representation, usually graphic, of a complex“real-world” data structure. Data models are used in thedatabase design phase of the database life cycle
data processing (DP) manager	A DP specialist whoevolved into a department supervisor. Roles includemanaging the technical and human resources, supervisingthe senior programmers, and troubleshooting the program.Also known as a data manager (DP)
data processing (DP) specialist	A now obsolete positionformed in the conversion from manual filing systems tocomputer filing systems; once filled by an employee whocreated and programmed the necessary file structures, wrotethe software that managed the data in those structures, anddesigned the application programs that produced reportsfrom the file data
data processor (DP)	The software component residing on acomputer that stores and retrieves data through a DDBMS.The DP is responsible for managing the local data in thecomputer and coordinating access to that data. See alsotransaction processor (TP)
data redundancy	A condition that exists when a dataenvironment contains redundant (unnecessarilyduplicated)data
data replication	The storage of duplicated databasefragments at multiple sites on a DDBMS. Duplication of thefragments is transparent to the end user. Used to providefault tolerance and performance enhancements
DataSet	In ADO.NET, refers to a disconnected memory-resident representation of the database. That is, the DataSetcontains tables, columns, rows, relationships, andconstraints
data source name (DSN)	Identifies and defines an ODBCdata source
data sparsity	A column distribution of values or the numberof different values a column could have
data store	The component of the decision support systemthat acts as a database for storage of business data andbusiness model data. The data in the data store has alreadybeen extracted and filtered from the external andoperational data and will be stored for access by the end-user query tool for the business data model
data warehouse	Bill Inmon, the acknowledged “father ofthe data warehouse,” defines the term as “an integrated,subject-oriented, time-variant, nonvolatile collection of datathat provides support for decision making.
DBMS performance tuning	Refers to the activities requiredto ensure that clients’ requests are responded to in thefastest way possible, while making optimum use of existingresources
deadlock	A condition that exists when two or moretransactions wait indefinitely for each other to release thelock on a previously locked data item. Also called deadlyembrace.See also lock
deadly embrace	See deadlock
decentralized design	A process in which conceptual designis used to model subsets of an organization’s databaserequirements. After verification of the views, processes, andconstraints, the subsets are then aggregated into a completedesign. Such modular designs are typical of complexsystems in which the data component consists of a relativelylarge number of objects and procedures. Compare tocentralized design
decision support system (DSS)	An arrangement ofcomputerized tools used to assist managerial decisionmaking within a business
deferred update	When transaction operations do notimmediately update a physical database. Also calleddeferred write
deferred write	See deferred update
DELETE	A SQL command that allows specific data rows tobe deleted from a table
denormalization	A process by which a table is changedfrom a higher level normal form to a lower level normalform. Usually done to increase processing speed. Potentiallyyields data anomalies
dependency diagram	A representation of all datadependencies within a table
derived attribute	An attribute that does not physically existwithin the entity and is derived via an algorithm. Example:Age = current date – birth date
description of operations	A document that provides aprecise, detailed, up-to-date, and thoroughly revieweddescription of the activities that define an organization’soperating environment
design trap	Occurs when a relationship is improperly orincompletely identified and, therefore, is represented in away that is not consistent with the real world. The mostcommon design trap is known as a fan trap
desktop database	A single-user database that runs on apersonal computer
determinant	Any attribute in a specific row whose valuedirectly determines other values in that row. See also Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF).64
determination	The role of a key. In the context of adatabase table, the statement “A determines B” indicatesthat knowing the value of attribute A means that (determine)the value of attribute B can be looked up (determined)
differential backup	A level of database backup in whichonly the last modifications to the database (when comparedwith a previous full backup copy) are copied
dimensions	Qualifying characteristics that provide additionalperspectives to a given fact
dimension tables	In a data warehouse, used to search,filter, or classify facts within a star schema. The fact table isin a one-to-many relationship with dimension tables
disaster management	The set of DBA activities dedicatedto securing data availability following a physical disaster or adatabase integrity failure
disjoint subtype (nonoverlapping subtype)	A unique andnonoverlapping subtype entity set
DISTINCT	A SQL clause designed to produce a list of onlythose values that are different from one another
distributed database	A logically related database that isstored over two or more physically independent sites
distributed database management system (DDBMS)	ADBMS that supports a database distributed across severaldifferent sites; governs the storage and processing oflogically related data over interconnected computer systemsin which both data and processing functions are distributedamong several sites
distributed data catalog (DDC)	A data dictionary thatcontains the description (fragment names, locations) of adistributed database. Also known as a distributed datadictionary (DDD)
distributed data dictionary (DDD)	See distributed datacatalog
distributed global schema	The database schemadescription of a distributed database as seen by the databaseadministrator
distributed processing	The activity of sharing (dividing) thelogical processing of a database over two or more sitesconnected by a network
distributed request	A database request that allows a singleSQL statement to access data in several remote DPs in adistributed database
distributed transaction	A database transaction thataccesses data in several remote DPs in a distributeddatabase
distribution transparency	A DDBMS feature that allows adistributed database to be treated as though it were a singlelogical database
document type definition (DTD)	A file with a .dtd filenameextension that describes XML elements; in effect, a DTD file642provides the description of a document’s composition anddefines the syntax rules or valid tags for each type of XMLdocument
domain	Used to organize and describe an attribute’s set ofpossible values
DO-UNDO-REDO protocol	Used by a DP to roll backand/or roll forward transactions with the help of a system’stransaction log entries
drill down	To decompose data into more atomiccomponents, that is, data at lower levels of aggregation.Used primarily in a decision support system to focus onspecific geographic areas, business types, and so on. Seealso roll up
DROP	A SQL command used to delete database objectssuch as tables, views, indexes, and users
durability	The transaction property indicating thepermanence of a database’s consistent state. Transactionsthat have been completed will not be lost in the event of asystem failure if the database has proper durability
dynamic-link libraries (DLLs)	Shared code libraries that aretreated as part of the operating system or server process sothey can be dynamically invoked at run time
dynamic query optimization	Refers to the process ofdetermining the SQL access strategy at run time, using themost up-to-date information about the database. Contrastwith static query optimization
dynamic SQL	A term used to describe an environment inwhich the SQL statement is not known in advance, butinstead is generated at run time. In a dynamic SQLenvironment, a program can generate the SQL statementsat run time that are required to respond to ad hoc queries
dynamic statistical generation mode	The distributeddatabase management system will automatically evaluateand update the statistical information after each access
dynamic-link libraries (DLLs)	Shared code modules thatare treated as part of the operating system or server processso they can be dynamically invoked at run time
EER diagram (EERD)	Refers to the entity-relationshipdiagram resulting from the application of extended entityrelationship concepts that provide additional semanticcontent in the ER model
embedded SQL	A term used to refer to SQL statementsthat are contained within an application programminglanguage such as COBOL, C++, ASP, Java, andColdFusion
end-user presentation tool	Used by a data analyst toorganize and present selected data compiled by the end-userquery tool
end-user query tool	Used by a data analyst to create thequeries that access the specific desired information from thedata store
enterprise database	The overall company datarepresentation, which provides support for present andexpected future needs
entity	Something about which someone wants to store data;typically a person, a place, a thing, a concept, or an event.See also attribute
entity cluster	A “virtual” entity type used to representmultiple entities and relationships in the ERD. An entitycluster is formed by combining multiple interrelated entitiesinto a single abstract entity object. An entity cluster isconsidered “virtual” or “abstract” in the sense that it is notactually an entity in the final ERD
entity instance	A term used in ER modeling to refer to aspecific table row. Also known as an entity occurrence
entity integrity	The property of a relational table thatguarantees that each entity has a unique value in a primarykey and that there are no null values in the primary key
entity occurrence	See entity instance
entity relationship diagram (ERD)	A diagram that depictsan entity relationship model’s entities, attributes, andrelations
entity relationship (ER) model	A data model developed byP. Chen in 1975. It describes relationships (1:1, 1:M, andM:N) among entities at the conceptual level with the help ofER diagrams
entity set	In a relational model, refers to a grouping ofrelated entities
entity subtype	In a generalization/specialization hierarchy,refers to a subset of an entity supertype where the entitysupertype contains the common characteristics and theentity subtypes contain the unique characteristics of eachentity subtype
entity supertype	In a generalization/specializationhierarchy, refers to a generic entity type that contains thecommon characteristics of entity subtypes
equijoin	A join operator that links tables based on an equalitycondition that compares specified columns of the tables
exclusive lock	A lock that is reserved by a transaction. Anexclusive lock is issued when a transaction requestspermission to write (update) a data item and no locks arepreviously held on that data item by any other transaction.An exclusive lock does not allow any other transactions toaccess the database. See also shared lock
existence-dependent	A property of an entity whoseexistence depends on one or more other entities. In anexistence-dependent environment, the existence-independent table must be created and loaded firstbecausethe existence-dependent key cannot reference atable that does not yet exist
existence-independent	An entity that can exist apart fromone or more related entities. It must be created first whenreferencing an existence-dependent table to it
explicit cursor	In procedural SQL, a cursor created to holdthe output of a SQL statement that may return two or morerows (but could return zero rows or only one row)
extended entity relationship (EER) model	Sometimesreferred to as the enhanced entity relationship model; theresult of adding more semantic constructs (entity supertypes,entity subtypes, and entity clustering) to the original entityrelationship (ER) model
extended relational data model (ERDM)	A model thatincludes the object-oriented model’s best features in aninherently simpler relational database structuralenvironment
extends	In a DBMS environment, refers to the data files’ability to automatically expand in size, using predefinedincrements
Extensible Markup Language (XML)	Derived from SGML,this is a metalanguage used to represent and manipulatedata elements. Unlike other markup languages, XMLpermits the manipulation of a document’s data elements
external model	The application programmer’s view of thedata environment. Given its business-unit focus, an externalmodel works with a data subset of the global databaseschema
external schema	The specific representation of an externalview, that is, the end user’s view of the data environment
facts	Measurements (values) that represent a specificbusiness aspect or activity. For example, sales figures arenumeric measurements that represent product and/orservice sales. Facts commonly used in business data analysisare units, costs, prices, and revenues
fact table	In a data warehouse, refers to the star schemacenter table containing facts that are linked and classifiedthrough their common dimensions. A fact table is in a one-to-many relationship with each associated dimension table
failure transparency	A DDBMS feature that allowscontinuous operation of a DDBMS, even in the event of afailure in one of the nodes of the network
fan trap	A design trap that occurs when one entity is in two1:M relationships to other entities, thus producing anassociation among the other entities that is not expressed inthe model
field	A character or group of characters (alphabetic ornumeric) that defines a characteristic of a person, place,orthing. For example, a person’s Social Security number,address, phone number, and bank balance all constitutefields.64
field-level lock	Allows concurrent transactions to access thesame row as long as they require the use of different fields(attributes) within that row. Yields the most flexible multiuserdata access but requires a high level of computer overhead
file	A named collection of related records
first normal form (1NF)	The first stage in the normalizationprocess. It describes a relation depicted in tabular format,with no repeating groups and with a primary key identified.All nonkey attributes in the relation are dependent on theprimary key
flags	Special codes implemented by designers to trigger arequired response, to alert end users to specified conditions,or to encode values. Flags may be used to prevent nulls bybringing attention to the absence of a value in a table
foreign key	See key
fourth-generation language (4GL)	A computer languagethat allows a user to specify what must be done withoutspecifying how it must be done. The most prominent 4GLin the database environment is SQL
fourth normal form (4NF)	A table is in 4NF when it is in3NF and contains no multiple independent sets ofmultivalued dependencies
fragmentation transparency	A DDBMS feature that allowsa system to treat a distributed database as a single databaseeven though the database is divided into two or morefragments
front-end CASE tools	A computer-aided software tool thathas been classified as “front end” because it providessupport for the planning, analysis, and design phases of theSDLC. In comparison, back-end case tools provide supportfor the coding and implementation phases
full backup (database dump)	A complete copy of an entiredatabase saved and periodically updated in a separatememory location. Ensures a full recovery of all data in theevent of a physical disaster or a database integrity failure
full functional dependence	A condition in which anattribute is functionally dependent on a composite key butnot on any subset of that composite key.fully heterogeneous distributed database system (full
heterogeneous DDBMS)	Integrates different types ofdatabase management systems (hierarchical, network, andrelational) over a network. It supports different databasemanagement systems that may even support different datamodels running under different computer systems, such asmainframes, minicomputers, and microcomputers. See alsoheterogeneous DDBMSand homogeneous DDBMS
fully replicated database	Stores multiple copies of eachdatabase fragment at multiple sites. See also partiallyreplicated database
functional dependence	Within a relation R, an attribute Bis functionally dependent on an attribute A if and only if a644given value of the attribute A determines exactly one valueof the attribute B. The relationship “B is dependent on A” isequivalent to “A determines B” and is written as A->B
granularity	Refers to the level of detail represented by thevalues stored in a table’s row. Data stored at their lowestlevel of granularity are said to be atomicdata
GROUP BY	A SQL clause used to create frequencydistributions when combined with any of the aggregatefunctions in a SELECT statement
hardware independence	Means that a model does notdepend on the hardware used in the implementation of themodel. Therefore, changes in the hardware will have noeffect on the database design at the conceptual level
HAVING	A particularly useful extension of the GROUP BYfeature. The HAVING clause is applied to the output of aGROUP BY operation to restrict the selected rows
heterogeneity transparency	A DDBMS feature that allowsa system to integrate several different centralized DBMSsinto one logical DDBMS
heterogeneous DDBMS	Integrates different types ofcentralized database management systems over a network.See also fully heterogeneous distributed database system(fully heterogeneous DDBMS)and homogeneous DDBMS
hierarchical model	No longer a major player in the currentdatabase market; important to know, however, because thebasic concepts and characteristics form the basis forsubsequent database development. This model is based onan “upside-down” tree structure in which each record iscalled a segment. The top record is the root segment. Eachsegment has a 1:M relationship to the segment directlybelow it
homogeneous DDBMS	Integrates only one particular typeof centralized database management system over a network.See also heterogeneous DDBMSand fully heterogeneousdistributed database system (fully heterogeneous DDBMS)
homonym	Indicates the use of the same name to labeldifferent attributes; generally should be avoided. Somerelational software automatically checks for homonyms andeither alerts the user to their existence or automaticallymakes the appropriate adjustments. See also synonym
horizontal fragmentation	The distributed database designprocess that breaks up a table into subsets consisting ofunique rows. See also database fragments andverticalfragmentation
host language	A term used to describe any language thatcontains embedded SQL statements
identifiers	The ERM uses identifiers to uniquely identifyeach entity instance. In the relational model, such identifiersare mapped to primary keys in tables
identifying relationship	A relationship that exists when therelated entities are existence-dependent. Also called a strongrelationshipor strong identifying relationshipbecause thedependent entity’s primary key contains the primary key ofthe parent entity
immediate update	When a database is immediately updatedby transaction operations during the transaction’s execution,even before the transaction reaches its commit point
implicit cursor	A cursor that is automatically created inprocedural SQL when the SQL statement returns onlyonevalue
inconsistent retrievals	A concurrency control problem thatarises when a transaction calculating summary (aggregate
functions over a set of data	while other transactions ar
updating the data	yields erroneous results
incremental backup	A process that makes a backup only ofdata that has changed in the database since the last backup(incremental or full)
index	An ordered array composed of index key values androw ID values (pointers). Indexes are generally used to speedup and facilitate data retrieval. Also known as an index key
index key	See index
index selectivity	A measure of how likely an index will beused in query processing
information	The result of processing raw data to reveal itsmeaning. Information consists of transformed data andfacilitates decision making
information engineering (IE)	A methodology thattranslates a company’s strategic goals into data andapplications that will help the company achieve its goals
information resource dictionary	See data dictionary
information resource manager (IRM)	See dataadministrator (DA)
information system (IS)	A system that provides for datacollection, storage, and retrieval; facilitates thetransformation of data into information and themanagement of both data and information. An informationsystem is composed of hardware, software (DMBS andapplications), the database(s), people, and procedures
information systems architecture (ISA)	The output of theinformation engineering (IE) process that serves as the basisfor planning, developing, and controlling future informationsystems. (IE allows for the translation of a company’sstrategic goals into the data and applications that will helpthe company achieve those goals. IE focuses on thedescription of the corporate data instead of the processes.
information systems (IS) department	An evolution of thedata-processing department when responsibilities werebroadened to include service and production functions
inheritance	In the object-oriented data model, the ability ofan object to inherit the data structure and methods of theclasses above it in the class hierarchy. See also classhierarchy
inner join	A join operation in which only rows that meet agiven criteria are selected. The join criteria can be anequality condition (natural join or equijoin) or an inequalitycondition (theta join). Inner join is the most commonly usedtype of join. Contrast with outer join
inner query	A query that is embedded (or nested) insideanother query. Also known as a nested query or asubquery
input/output (IO) request	A low-level (read or write) dataaccess operation to/from computer devices (such asmemory, hard disks, video, and printers)
INSERT	A SQL command that allows the insertion of datarows into a table, one row at a time or multiple rows at atime, using a subquery
internal model	In database modeling, refers to a level ofdata abstraction that adapts the conceptual model to aspecific DBMS model for implementation
internal schema	Depicts a specific representation of aninternal model, using the database constructs supported bythe chosen database. (The internal model is therepresentation of a database as “seen” by the DBMS. Inother words, the internal model requires a designer to matchthe conceptual model’s characteristics and constraints tothose of the selected implementation model.
islands of information	A term used in the old-style filesystem environment to refer to independent, oftenduplicated, and inconsistent data pools created andmanaged by different organizational departments
isolation	A property of a database transaction thatguarantees that a data item used by one transaction is notavailable to other transactions until the first transaction ends
iterative process	A process based on repetition of stepsand procedures
Java	An object-oriented programming language developedby Sun Microsystems that runs on top of the Web browsersoftware. Java applications are compiled and stored in theWeb server. Java’s main advantage is its ability to letapplication developers develop their applications once andrun them in many environments
JavaScript	A scripting language (one that enables therunning of a series of commands or macros) developed byNetscape that allows Web authors to design interactive Websites. JavaScript code is embedded in Web pages. This645JavaScript is downloaded with the page and is activatedwhen a specific event takes place, such as a mouse click onanobject
join columns	A term used to refer to the columns that jointwo tables. The join columns generally share similar values
key	An entity identifier based on the concept of functionaldependence; may be classified as follows: Superkey:Anattribute (or combination of attributes) that uniquelyidentifies each entity in a table. Candidate key:A minimalsuperkey, that is, one that does not contain a subset ofattributes that is itself a superkey. Primary key (PK):Acandidate key selected as a unique entity identifier.Secondary key:A key that is used strictly for data retrievalpurposes. For example, a customer is not likely to know hisor her customer number (primary key), but the combinationof last name, first name, middle initial, and telephonenumber is likely to make a match to the appropriate tablerow. Foreign key:An attribute (or combination of attributes)in one table whose values must match the primary key inanother table or whose values must be null
key attribute(s)	The attribute(s) that form(s) a primary key.See also prime attribute
knowledge	The body of information and facts about aspecific subject. Knowledge implies familiarity, awareness,and understanding of information as it applies to anenvironment. A key characteristic of knowledge is that“new” knowledge can be derived from “old” knowledge
left outer join	In a pair of tables to be joined, a left outerjoin yields all of the rows in the left table, including thosethat have no matching values in the other table. Forexample, a left outer join of Customer with Agent will yieldall of the Customer rows, including the ones that do nothave a matching Agent row. See also outer join and rightouter join
linking table	In the relational model, a table thatimplements a M:M relationship. See also composite entity
local mapping transparency	A property of a DDBMS inwhich access to the data requires the end user to know boththe name and the location of the fragments in order toaccess the database. See also location transparency
location transparency	The property of a DDBMS in whichaccess to the data requires that only the name of thedatabase fragments be known. (Fragment locations need notbe known.) See alsolocal mapping transparency
lock	A device that is employed to guarantee unique use of adata item to a particular transaction operation, therebypreventing other transactions from using that data item. Atransaction requires a lock prior to data access, and that lock646is released (unlocked) after the operation’s execution toenable other transactions to lock the data item for their use
lock granularity	Indicates the level of lock use. Locking cantake place at the following levels: database, table, page, row,and field (attribute)
lock manager	A DBMS component that is responsible forassigning and releasing locks
logical data format	The way in which a human beingviewsdata
logical design	A stage in the design phase that matches theconceptual design to the requirements of the selected DBMSand is, therefore, software-dependent. It is used to translatethe conceptual design into the internal model for a selecteddatabase management system, such as DB2, SQL Server,Oracle, IMS, Informix, Access, and Ingress
logical independence	A condition that exists when theinternal model can be changed without affecting theconceptual model. (The internal model is hardware-independent because it is unaffected by the choice ofcomputer on which the software is installed. Therefore, achange in storage devices or even a change in operatingsystems will not affect the internal model.
lost updates	A concurrency control problem in which dataupdates are lost during the concurrent execution oftransactions
mandatory participation	A term used to describe arelationship in which one entity occurrence must have acorresponding occurrence in another entity. Example:EMPLOYEE works in DIVISION. (A person cannot be anemployee if he or she is not assigned to a company’sdivision.
manual query optimization	An operation mode thatrequires the end user or programmer to define the accesspath for the execution of a query
manual statistical generation mode	One mode ofgenerating statistical data access information used for queryoptimization. In this mode, the DBA must periodically run aroutine to generate the data access statistics; for example,running the RUNSTAT command in an IBM DB2 database
many-to-many(M:N or M:M) relationships	One of threetypes of relationships (associations among two or moreentities) in which one occurrence of an entity is associatedwith many occurrences of a related entity and oneoccurrence of the related entity is associated with manyoccurrences of the first entity
materialized view	A dynamic table that not only containsthe SQL query command to generate the rows, but alsostores the actual rows. The materialized view is created thefirst time the query is run and the summary rows are storedin the table. The materialized view rows are automaticallyupdated when the base tables are updated
MAX	A SQL aggregate function that yields the maximumattribute value encountered in a given column
metadata	Data about data, that is, data concerning datacharacteristics and relationships. See also data dictionary
method	In the object-oriented data model, a named set ofinstructions to perform an action. Methods represent real-world actions. Methods are invoked through messages
metrics	In a data warehouse, numeric facts that measuresomething of interest to the end user
MIN	A SQL aggregate function that yields the minimumattribute value encountered in a given column
minimal data rule	Defined as “All that is needed is there,and all that is there is needed.” In other words, all dataelements required by database transactions must be definedin the model, and all data elements defined in the modelmust be used by at least one database transaction
mixed fragmentation	Regarding data fragmentation, refersto a combination of horizontal and vertical strategies,meaning a table may be divided into several rows, each rowhaving a subset of the attributes (columns)
module	(1) A design segment that can be implemented asan autonomous unit, sometimes linked to produce a system.(2) An information system component that handles aspecific function, such as inventory, orders, or payroll
module coupling	A description of the extent to whichmodules are independent of one another
monotonicity	Ensures that time stamp values alwaysincrease. (The time stamping approach to schedulingconcurrent transactions assigns a global, unique time stamp toeach transaction. The time stamp value produces an explicitorder in which transactions are submitted to the DBMS.)multidimensional database management syste
(MDBMS)	A database management system that usesproprietary techniques to store data in matrixlike arrays ofn-dimensions, known as cubes
multidimensional online analytical processing (MOLAP)	Extends online analytical processing functionality tomultidimensional database management systems
multiple-site processing, multiple-site data (MPMD)	Ascenario describing a fully distributed database managementsystem with support for multiple DPs and transactionprocessors at multiple sites
multiple-site processing, single-site data (MPSD)	Ascenario in which multiple processes run on differentcomputers sharing a single data repository
multiuser database	A database that supports multipleconcurrent users
multivalued attribute	An attribute that can have manyvalues for a single entity occurrence. For example, anEMP_DEGREE attribute might store the string “BBA, MBA,PHD” to indicate three different degrees held
mutual consistency rule	A data replication rule requiringthat all copies of data fragments be identical
mutual exclusiverule	A condition in which only onetransaction at a time can own an exclusive lock on thesameobject
natural join	A relational operation that links tables byselecting only the rows with common values in theircommon attribute(s)
natural key (natural identifier)	A real-world, generallyaccepted identifier used to identify real-world objects. As itsname implies, a natural key is familiar to end users andforms part of their day-to-day business vocabulary
network model	A data model standard created by theCODASYL Data Base Task Group in the late 1960s. Itrepresented data as a collection of record types andrelationships as predefined sets with an owner record typeand a member record type in a 1:M relationship
network schema	In a network data base model, defines theconceptual organization of the entire database as viewed bythe database administrator. The schema includes a definitionof the database name, the record type for each record, andthe components that make up those records
network subschema	In a network database model, definesthe portion of the database “seen” by the applicationprograms that actually produce the desired informationfromthe data contained within the database. The existenceof subschema definitions allows all application programssimply to invoke the subschema required to access theappropriate data
non-identifying relationship	A relationship that occurswhen the primary key of the dependent (many side) entitydoes not contain the primary key of the related parententity. Also known as a weak relationship
nonkey attribute	See nonprime attribute
nonprime attribute	An attribute that is not part of a key
normalization	A process that assigns attributes to entities insuch a way that data redundancies are reduced oreliminated
NOT	A SQL logical operator that negates a given predicate
null	In SQL, refers to the absence of an attribute value.Note: A null is not a blank
object	An abstract representation of a real-world entity thathas a unique identity, embedded properties, and the abilityto interact with other objects and with itself.64
Object Linking and Embedding for Database (OLE-DB)	Based on Microsoft’s Component Object Model (COM),OLE-DB is database middleware that adds object-orientedfunctionality for accessing relational and nonrelational data.OLE-DB was the first part of Microsoft’s strategy to providea unified object-oriented framework for the development ofnext-generation applications.object-oriented database management syste
(OODBMS)	Data management software used to managedata found within an object-oriented database model
object-oriented data model (OODM)	A data model whosebasic modeling structure is an object
object-oriented programming (OOP)	An alternative toconventional programming methods based on object-oriented concepts. It reduces programming time and lines ofcode and increases programmers’ productivity.object/relational database management syste
(O/RDBMS)	A DBMS based on the extended relationalmodel (ERDM.) The ERDM, championed by many relationaldatabase researchers, constitutes the relational model’sresponse to the OODM. This model includes many of theobject-oriented model’s best features within an inherentlysimpler relational database structural environment
one-to-many (1:M)relationship	One of three types ofrelationships (associations among two or more entities) thatare used by data models. In a 1:M relationship, one entityinstance is associated with many instances of the relatedentity
one-to-one (1:1) relationship	One of three types ofrelationships (associations among two or more entities)that are used by data models. In a 1:1 relationship, oneentity instance is associated with only one instance of therelated entity
online analytical processing (OLAP)	Decision supportsystem (DSS) tools that use multidimensional dataanalysis techniques. OLAP creates an advanced dataanalysis environment that supports decision making,business modeling, and operations research activities
Open Database Connectivity (ODBC)	Databasemiddleware developed by Microsoft to provide a databaseaccess API to Windows applications
operational database	A database that is designedprimarily to support a company’s day-to-day operations.Also known as atransactionaldatabase or productiondatabase
optimizer hints	Special instructions for the query optimizerthat are embedded inside the SQL command text
optional participation	Means that one entity occurrencedoes not require a corresponding entity occurrence in aparticular relationship.64
OR	The SQL logical operator used to link multipleconditional expressions in a WHERE or HAVING clause. Itrequires that only one of the conditional expressions be true
ORDER BY	A SQL clause useful for ordering the output ofa SELECT query (for example, in ascending or descendingorder)
outer join	A relational-algebra JOIN operation that producesa table in which all unmatched pairs are retained; unmatchedvalues in the related table are left null. Contrast with innerjoin. See also left outer joinand right outer join
overlapping subtypes	Subtypes that contain a subset of thesupertype entity set, but each entity instance (row) of thesupertype can appear in more than one subtype
page-level lock	In this type of lock, the databasemanagement system will lock an entire diskpage, or sectionof a disk. A diskpage can contain data for one or more rowsand from one or more tables
partial completeness	In a generalization hierarchy, meansthat not every supertype occurrence is a member of asubtype; that is, there may be some supertype occurrencesthat are not members of any subtype
partial dependency	In normalization, a condition in whichan attribute is dependent on only a portion (subset) of theprimary key
partially replicated database	A distributed database inwhich copies of only some database fragments are stored atmultiple sites. See also fully replicated database
participants	An ER term used to label the entities thatparticipate in a relationship. Example: PROFESSOR teachesCLASS. (The teachesrelationship is based on theparticipants PROFESSOR and CLASS.
partitioned data allocation strategy	In a DDBMS, the dataallocation strategy in which the database is divided intofragments that are stored at several sites
partitioning	The process of splitting a table into subsets ofrows or columns
passive data dictionary	A DBMS data dictionary thatrequires an end-user-initiated command to update its dataaccess statistics. See also data dictionary
performance transparency	A DDBMS feature that allows asystem to perform as though it were a centralized DBMS(no degradation of response times)
performance tuning	Activities that make a databaseperform more efficiently in terms of storage and accessspeed
periodicity	Usually expressed as current year only, previousyears, or all years; provides information about the time spanof data stored in a table
persistent stored module (PSM)	A block of code(containing standard SQL statements and proceduralextensions) that is stored and executed at the DBMS server
personalization	Customization of a Web page forindividualusers
physical data format	The way in which a computer “sees”(stores) data
physical design	A stage of database design that maps thedata storage and access characteristics of a database. Sincethese characteristics are a function of the types of devicessupported by the hardware, the data access methodssupported by the system (and the selected DBMS) physicaldesign is both hardware- and software-dependent. See alsophysical model
physical independence	A condition that exists when thephysical model can be changed without affecting theinternalmodel
physical model	A model in which the physicalcharacteristics (location, path, and format) are described forthe data. Both hardware- and software-dependent. See alsophysical design
plug-in	In the World Wide Web (WWW), a client-side,external application that is automatically invoked by thebrowser when it is needed to manage specific types of data
policies	General statements of direction that are used tomanage company operations through the communicationand support of the organization’s objectives
predicate logic	Used extensively in mathematics, provides aframework in which an assertion (statement of fact) can beverified as either true or false. For example, suppose that astudent with a student ID of 12345678 is named MelissaSanduski. That assertion can easily be demonstrated to betrue or false
primary key (PK)	In the relational model, an identifiercomposed of one or more attributes that uniquely identifiesa row. See also key
prime attribute	A key attribute, that is, an attribute that ispart of a key or is the whole key. See also key attribute
privacy	Control of data usage dealing with the rights ofindividuals and organizations to determine the “who, what,when, where, and how” of data access
procedural SQL (PL/SQL)	A type of SQL that allows theuse of procedural code and SQL statements that are storedin a database as a single callable object that can be invokedby name
procedure cache	A shared, reserved memory area thatstores the most recently executed SQL statements orPL/SQL procedures (including triggers and functions).Alsocalled SQL cache
procedures	Series of steps to be followed during theperformance of a given activity or process
production database	The main database designed to keeptrack of the day-to-day operations of a company. See alsotransactional database
profile	In Oracle, a named collection of settings thatcontrols how much of the database resource a given usercan use
query	A question or task asked by an end user of a database inthe form of SQL code. A specific request for data manipulationissued by the end user or the application to the DBMS
query language	A nonprocedural language that is used by aDBMS to manipulate its data. An example of a querylanguage is SQL
query optimizer	A DBMS process that analyzes SQLqueries and finds the most efficient way to access the data.The query optimizer generates the access or execution planfor the query
query result set	The collection of data rows that arereturned by a query
RAID	An acronym that means Redundant Array ofIndependent Disks. RAID is used to provide balancebetween performance and fault tolerance. RAID systems usemultiple disks to create virtual disks (storage volumes)formed by several individual disks. RAID systems provideperformance improvement and fault tolerance
record	A collection of related (logically connected) fields
recursive query	A nested query that joins a table to itself.For example, a recursive query joins the EMPLOYEE tableto itself
recursive relationship	A relationship that is found within asingle entity type. For example, an EMPLOYEE is marriedto an EMPLOYEE or a PART is a component of anotherPART
redundant transaction logs	Most database managementsystems keep several copies of the transaction log to ensurethat the physical failure of a disk will not impair the DBMS’sability to recover data
referential integrity	A condition by which a dependenttable’s foreign key must have either a null entry or amatching entry in the related table. Even though an attributemay not have a correspondingattribute, it is impossible tohave an invalid entry
relational algebra	A set of mathematical principles thatform the basis of the manipulation of relational tablecontents; composed of eight main functions: SELECT,PROJECT, JOIN, INTERSECT, UNION, DIFFERENCE,PRODUCT, and DIVIDE.64
relational database management system (RDBMS)	Acollection of programs that manages a relational database.The RDBMS software translates a user’s logical requests(queries) into commands that physically locate and retrievethe requested data. A good RDBMS also creates andmaintains a data dictionary (system catalog) to help providedata security, data integrity, concurrent access, easy access,and system administration to the data in the databasethrough a query language (SQL) and application programs
relational model	Developed by E. F. Codd (of IBM) in1970, it represents a major breakthrough for users anddesigners because of its conceptual simplicity. The relationalmodel, based on mathematical set theory, represents data asindependent relations. Each relation (table) is conceptuallyrepresented as a matrix of intersecting rows and columns.The relations are related to each other through the sharingof common entity characteristics (values in columns)
relational online analytical processing (ROLAP)	Providesonline analytical processing functionality by using relationaldatabases and familiar relational query tools to store andanalyze multidimensional data
relational schema	The description of the organization of arelational database as seen by the database administrator
relations	In a relational database model, represent entitysets. Relations are implemented as tables. Relations (tables)are related to each other through the sharing of a commonentity characteristic (value in a column)
relationship	An association between entities
relationship degree	Indicates the number of entities orparticipants associated with a relationship. A relationshipdegree can be unary, binary, ternary, or higher level
Remote Data Objects (RDO)	A higher-level object-orientedapplication interface used to access remote database servers.RDO uses the lower-level DAO and ODBC for direct accessto databases. RDO was optimized to deal with server-baseddatabases such as MS SQL Server, Oracle, and DB2
remote request	A DDBMS feature that allows a single SQLstatement to access data in a single remote DP. See alsoremote transaction
remote transaction	A DDBMS feature that allows atransaction (formed by several requests) to access data in asingle remote DP. See also remote request
repeating groups	In a relation, a characteristic describing agroup of multiple entries of the same type that exist for asingle key attribute occurrence. For example, a car can havemultiple colors (top, interior, bottom, trim, and so on)
replicated data allocation	A data allocation strategy bywhich copies of one or more database fragments are storedat several sites
replica transparency	Refers to the DDBMS’s ability to hidethe existence of multiple copies of data from the user.65
replication	The process of creating and managing duplicateversions of a database. Used to place copies in differentlocations and to improve access time and fault tolerance
reserved words	Words that are used by a system and thatcannot be used for any other purpose. For example, inOracle SQL , the word INITIAL cannot be used to nametables or columns
right outer join	In a pair of tables to be joined, a right outerjoin yields all of the rows in the right table, including theones with no matching values in the other table. Forexample, a right outer join of CUSTOMER with AGENT willyield all of the agent rows, including the ones that do nothave a matching CUSTOMER row. See also left outer joinand outer join
role	In Oracle, a named collection of database accessprivileges that authorize a user to connect to a database anduse the database system resources
ROLLBACK	A SQL command that restores the databasetable contents to their original condition (the condition thatexisted after the last COMMIT statement)
roll up	In SQL, an OLAP extension used with the GROUPBY clause to aggregate data by different dimensions.(Rolling up the data is the exact opposite of drilling downthe data.) See also drill down
row-level lock	A comparatively less restrictive database lockwhere the DBMS allows concurrent transactions to accessdifferent rows of the same table, even when the rows arelocated on the same page
row-level trigger	A trigger that is executed once for eachrow affected by the triggering SQL statement. A row-leveltrigger requires the use of the s FOR EACH ROW keywordsin the trigger declaration
rule-based optimizer	A query optimization mode based onthe rule-based query optimization algorithm
rule-based query optimization algorithm	A queryoptimization technique that uses a set of preset rules andpoints to determine the best approach to executing a query
rules of precedence	Basic algebraic rules that specify theorder in which operations are performed, such as conditionswithin parentheses being executed first. For example, in theequation 2 + (3 * 5), the multiplication portion is calculatedfirst, making the correct answer 17
scheduler	The DBMS component that is responsible forestablishing the order in which concurrent transactionoperations are executed. The scheduler interleavestheexecution of database operations in a specific order(sequence) to ensure serializability
schema	A logical grouping of database objects (tables,indexes, views, queries, etc.) that are related to each other.Usually, a schema belongs to a single user or application
scope	That part of a system that defines the extent of thedesign, according to operational requirements
script	A programming language that is not compiled, butrather is interpreted and executed at run time
search services	Business-enabling Web services that allowWeb sites to perform searches on their contents
secondary key	A key that is used strictly for data retrievalpurposes. For example, a customer is not likely to know hisor her customer number (primary key), but the combinationof last name, first name, middle initial, and telephonenumber is likely to make a match to the appropriate tablerow. See also key
second normal form (2NF)	The second stage in thenormalization process in which a relation is in 1NF andthere are no partial dependencies (dependencies in only partof the primary key)
security	(1) Protecting data against accidental or intentionaluse by unauthorized users. (2) Services designed to ensuresafety and privacy of data through encryption, digitalcertificates, SSL, S-HTTP, firewalls, and proxy servers
SELECT	A SQL command that yields the values of all rowsor a subset of rows in a table. The SELECT statement isused to retrieve data from tables
semantic data model	The first of a series of data modelsthat more closely represented the real world, modeling bothdata and their relationships in a single structure known as anobject. The SDM, published in 1981, was developed by M.Hammer and D. McLeod
serializability	A transaction property that ensures that theselected order of transaction operations creates a finaldatabase state that would have been produced if thetransactions had been executed in a serial fashion
server-side extension	A program that interacts directly withthe server process to handle specific types of requests. Theyadd significant functionality to Web servers and to intranets
set theory	A mathematical science component that dealswith sets, or groups of things, and is used as the basis fordata manipulation in the relational model
shared lock	A lock that is issued when a transactionrequests permission to read data from a database and noexclusive locks are held on that data by another transaction.A shared lock allows other read-only transactions to accessthe database. See also exclusive lock
simple attribute	An attribute that cannot be subdivided intomeaningful components. Compare to composite attribute
single-site processing, single-site data (SPSD)	A scenarioin which all processing is done on a single CPU or hostcomputer (mainframe, minicomputer, or PC) and all data arestored on the host computer’s local disk
single-user DBMS	A database management systemclassification that depicts a DBMS that supports only oneuser at atime
single-valued attribute	An attribute that can have onlyonevalue
slice and dice	Multidimensional jargon meaning the abilityto cut slices off of the data cube to perform a more detailedanalysis
snowflake schema	A type of star schema in which thedimension tables can have their own dimension tables. Thesnowflake schema is usually the result of normalizingdimension tables
software independence	A property of any model orapplication that does not depend on the software used toimplement it
sparsity	In multidimensional data analysis, a measurementof the density of the data held in the data cube
specialization hierarchy	A hierarchy that is based on thetop-down process of identifying lower-level, more specificentity subtypes from a higher-level entity supertype.Specialization is based on grouping unique characteristicsand relationships of the subtypes
SQL cache	A shared, reserved memory area that stores themost recently executed SQL statements or PL/SQLprocedures (including triggers and functions). Also calledprocedure cache
SQL performance tuning	Activities oriented towardgenerating a SQL query that returns the correct answer inthe least amount of time, using the minimum amount ofresources at the server end
standards	A detailed and specific set of instructions thatdescribes the minimum requirements for a given activity.Standards are used to evaluate the quality of the output
star schema	A data modeling technique used to mapmultidimensional decision support data into a relationaldatabase. The star schema represents data, using a centraltable known as a fact table, in a 1:M relationship with oneor more dimension tables
stateless system	Describes the fact that at any given time, aWeb server does not know the status of any of the clientscommunicating with it. The Web does not reserve memoryto maintain an open communications “state” between theclient and the server
statement-level trigger	A SQL trigger that is assumed if theFOR EACH ROW keywords are omitted. This type oftrigger is executed once, before or after the triggeringstatement completes, and is the default case
static query optimization	A query optimization mode inwhich the access path to a database is predetermined atcompilation time. Contrast with dynamic queryoptimization
static SQL	A style of embedded SQL in which the SQLstatements do not change while the application is running.65
statistically based query optimization algorithm	A queryoptimization technique that uses statistical information abouta database. These statistics are then used by the DBMS todetermine the best access strategy
stored function	A named group of procedural and SQLstatements that returns a value, indicated by a RETURNstatement in its program code
stored procedure	(1) A named collection of procedural andSQL statements. (2) Business logic stored on a server in theform of SQL code or some other DBMS-specific procedurallanguage
strong (identifying) relationship	When two entities areexistence-dependent; from a database design perspective,this exists whenever the primary key of the related entitycontains the primary key of the parent entity
structural dependence	A data characteristic that existswhen a change in the database schema affects data access,thus requiring changes in all access programs
structural independence	A data characteristic that existswhen changes in the database schema do not affectdataaccess
Structured Query Language (SQL)	A powerful and flexiblerelational database language composed of commands thatenable users to create database and table structures,perform various types of data manipulation and dataadministration, and query the database to extract usefulinformation
subordinate	In a DDBMS, a DP node that participates in adistributed transaction, using the two-phase COMMITprotocol
subquery	A query that is embedded (or nested) insideanother query. Also known as a nested queryor aninnerquery
subtype (entity set)	An entity (set) that contains the uniquecharacteristics (attributes) of an entity whose generalcharacteristics are found in another, more broadly definedentity known as a supertype. In a generalization hierarchy, itis any entity that is found below a parent entity. Example:The subtype PILOT of the supertype EMPLOYEE
subtype discriminator	The attribute in the supertype entitythat determines to which entity subtype each supertypeoccurrence is related
SUM	A SQL aggregate function that yields the sum of allvalues for a given column or expression
superkey	See key
supertype (entity set)	An entity (set) that contains thegeneral (commonly shared) characteristics of an entity (seesubtype). If the entity set can include characteristics that arenot common to all entities within the set, the supertypebecomes the parent to one or more subtypes in ageneralization hierarchy.65
surrogate key	A system-assigned primary key, generallynumeric and auto-incremented
synonym	The use of different names to identify the sameobject, such as an entity, an attribute, or a relationship;should generally be avoided. See also homonym
system catalog	A detailed system data dictionary thatdescribes all objects in a database
systems administrator (SYSADM)	The person responsiblefor coordinating the activities of the data processingfunction
systems analysis	The process that establishes the need forand the extent of an information system
systems development	The process of creating aninformation system
Systems Development Life Cycle(SDLC)	The cycle thattraces the history (life cycle) of an information system. TheSDLC provides the big picture within which the databasedesign and application development can be mapped out andevaluated
table	A (conceptual) matrix composed of intersecting rows(entities) and columns (attributes) that represents an entityset in the relational model. Also called relation
table-level lock	A locking scheme that allows only onetransaction at a time to access a table. A table-level locklocks an entire table, preventing access to any row bytransaction T2 while transaction T1 is using the table
table space	In a DBMS, a logical storage space used togroup related data. Also known as file group
tag	In markup languages such as HTML and XML, acommand inserted in a document to specify how thedocument should be formatted. Tags are used in server-sidemarkup languages and interpreted by a Web browser forpresenting data
ternary relationship	An ER term used to describe anassociation (relationship) between three entities. Example: ACONTRIBUTOR contributes money to a FUND from whicha RECIPIENT receives money
theta join	A join operator that links tables, using aninequality comparison operator (<, >, <=, >=) in the joincondition
third-generation language (3GL)	A language that requiresa programmer to specify both what must be done and howit must be done. Examples include COBOL, BASIC, andFORTRAN
third normal form (3NF)	A table is in 3NF when it is in2NF and no nonkey attribute is functionally dependent onanother nonkey attribute; that is, it cannot include transitivedependencies
time stamping	In transaction management, a techniqueused in scheduling concurrent transactions that assigns aglobal unique time stamp to each transaction
time-variant data	Data whose values are a function of time.For example, time variant data can be seen at work whenthe history of all administrative appointments (date ofappointment and date of termination) are tracked
top-down design	A design philosophy that begins bydefining the main (macro) structures of a system and thenmoves to define the smaller units within those structures. Indatabase design, it is a process that first identifies entitiesand then defines the attributes within the entities. Compareto bottom-up design
total completeness	In a generalization/specializationhierarchy, a condition in which every supertype occurrencemust be a member of at least one subtype
transaction	A sequence of database operations (one ormore database requests) that accesses the database. Atransaction is a logical unit of work; that is, it must b
entirelycompleted or aborted	no intermediate endingstates are accepted. All transactions must have the followingproperties: (1) Atomicityrequires that, unless all operations(parts) of a transaction are completed, the transaction beaborted. A transaction is treated as a single, indivisiblelogical unit of work. (2) Consistencyindicates thepermanence of the database consistent state. Once atransaction is completed, the database reaches a consistentstate. (3) Isolationassures that the data used during theexecution of a transaction cannot be used by a secondtransaction until the first one is completed. (4) Durabilityassures that once transaction changes are done, they cannotbe undone or lost, even in the event of a system failure.(5)Serializabilityensures that the selected order oftransaction operations creates a final database state thatwould have been produced if the transactions had beenexecuted in a serial fashion
transactional database	A database designed to keep trackof the day-to-day transactions of an organization. See alsoproduction database
transaction log	A feature used by the DBMS to keep trackof all transaction operations that update the database. Theinformation stored in this log is used by the DBMS forrecovery purposes
transaction log backup	Backs up only the transaction logoperations that are not reflected in a previous backup copyof the database
transaction manager (TM)	See transactionprocessor(TP)
transaction processor (TP)	In a DDBMS, the softwarecomponent on each computer that requests data. The TP isresponsible for the execution and coordination of alldatabases issued by a local application that access data onany DP. Also called transaction manager (TM).See alsodata processor (DP)
transaction transparency	A DDBMS property that ensuresthat database transactions will maintain the distributeddatabase’s integrity and consistency. They ensure that atransaction will be completed only when all database sitesinvolved in the transaction complete their part of thetransaction
transitive dependency	A condition in which an attribute isdependent on another attribute that is not part of theprimary key
trigger	A procedural SQL code that is automatically invokedby the relational database management system upon theoccurrence of a data manipulation event
tuple	In the relational model, a table row
two-phase commit protocol	In a DDBMS, an algorithmused to ensure atomicity of transactions and databaseconsistency as well as integrity in distributed transactions
two-phase locking	A set of rules that governs the waytransactions acquire and relinquish locks. Two-phase lockingguarantees serializability, but it does not prevent deadlocks.The two-phase locking protocol is divided into two phases:(1) A growing phaseoccurs when the transaction acquiresall of the locks that it needs without unlocking any existingdata locks. Once all locks have been acquired, thetransaction is in its lockedpoint. (2) A shrinking phaseoccurs when the transaction releases all locks and cannotobtain a new lock
unary relationship	An ER term used to describe anassociation withinan entity. Example: A COURSE is aprerequisite to another COURSE
uncommitted data	When trying to achieve concurrencycontrol, uncommitted data causes data integrity andconsistency problems. It occurs when two transactions areexecuted concurrently and the first transaction is rolled backafter the second transaction has already accessed theuncommitted data, thus violating the isolation property oftransactions
union-compatible	Two or more tables are union-compatiblewhen they share the same column names and the columnshave compatible data types or domains
unique fragment	In a DDBMS, a condition indicating thateach row is unique, regardless of which fragment it islocated in
unique index	An index in which the index key can haveonly one pointer value (row) associated with it
uniqueness	In concurrency control, a property of timestamping that ensures that no equal time stamp values can exist
Universal Data Access (UDA)	Within the Microsoftapplication framework, a collection of technologies used toaccess any type of data source and to manage the datathrough a common interface.65
unreplicated database	A distributed database in whicheach database fragment is stored at a single site
updatable view	A view that can be used to update attributesin base tables that are used in the view
UPDATE	A SQL command that allows attribute values to bechanged in one or more rows of a table
user	In a system, a uniquely identifiable object that allows agiven person or process to log on to the database
VBScript	A client-side extension in the form of a Microsoftlanguage product used to extend a browser’s functionality;derived from Visual Basic
vertical fragmentation	In distributed database design, theprocess that breaks up a table into fragments consisting of asubset of columns from the original table. Fragments mustshare a common primary key. See also database fragmentsandhorizontal fragmentation
very large databases (VLDBs)	As the name implies
databases that contain huge amounts of data	gigabyte,terabyte, and petabytes ranges are not unusual
view	A virtual table based on a SELECT query
wait/die	A concurrency control scheme in which the oldertransaction waits and the younger transaction is rolled backand rescheduled
weak entity	An entity that displays existence dependenceand inherits the primary key of its parent entity. Example: ADEPENDENT requires the existence of an EMPLOYEE
weak relationship	A relationship that exists when the PK ofthe related entity does not contain a PK component of theparent entity. Also known as a non-identifyingrelationship
Web application server	A middleware application thatexpands the functionality of Web servers by linking them toa wide range of services, such as databases, directorysystems, and search engines
Web-to-database middleware	A database server-sideextension program that retrieves data from databases andpasses it on to the Web server, which sends it to the client’sbrowser for display purposes
wildcard character	A symbol that can be used as a generalsubstitute for one or more characters
workgroup database	A multiuser database that supports arelatively small number of users (usually fewer than 50) orthat is used for a specific department in an organization.65
wound/wait	A concurrency control scheme in which theolder transaction rolls back the younger transaction andreschedules it
write-ahead-log protocol	In concurrency control, a processthat ensures that transaction logs are always written topermanent storage before any database data are actuallyupdated. Also called write-ahead protocol
write-ahead protocol	See write-ahead-log protocol
write-through	In concurrency control, a process thatensures that a database is immediately updated bytransaction operations during the transaction’sexecution, even before the transaction reaches itscommitpoint
XML schema	An advanced data definition language that isused to describe the structure (elements, data types,relationship types, ranges, and default values) of XML datadocuments. One of the main advantages of an XML schemais that it more closely maps to database terminology andfeatures. For example, an XML schema will be able todefine common database types such as date, integer ordecimal, minimum and maximum values, list of valid values,and required elements. Using the XML schema, a companycould validate the data for values that may be out of range,incorrect dates, valid values, and so on
XML schema definition (XSD)	A file containing thedescription of an XML document
XSL(Extensible Style Language)	A specification used todefine the rules by which XML data are formatted anddisplayed. The XSL specification is divided into two parts:Extensible Style Language Transformations (XSLT) and XSLstyle sheets
XSL style sheets	Similar to presentation templates, definethe presentation rules applied to XML elements. The XSLstyle sheet describes the formatting options to apply to XMLelements when they are displayed on a browser, cellularphone display, PDA screen, and so on